Curated used data compiled by the National Ski Areas Association (NSAA) to rank states based on the number of ski areas in each.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

(---Slide1---) States with the most ski resorts (---1Slide---)

Skis naturally evolved from snowshoes a couple of thousand years ago throughout much of the world, but didn’t arrive in North American until Russian trappers brought them to Alaska as a means of transport. Skis were also used in winter mining towns during the 19th century (where they were called “Norwegian snow-shoes”), and their popularity was spread throughout California by European immigrants arriving for the Gold Rush.

The sport began to stick as a widespread leisure activity in the Northeast, where stately new ski resorts were popping up around freshly cut ski trails and mountain roads carved out by a depression-era work-relief program called the Civilian Conservation Corps. The rise of American ski resorts is inextricably linked to the efforts of the CCC, which carved trails and roads to some of the most popular ski resorts of today including access roads to Mad River Glen in Vermont and Timberline in Oregon.

Curated used data compiled by the National Ski Areas Association, a U.S. trade association for ski area owners and operators, to rank states based on the number of ski areas in each. Each state also includes both the oldest and newest ski resort and which year it opened. If more than one state ties for the number of ski areas, each state is ranked the same and the numbering continues.  

One of the most notable early U.S. skiers was John “Snowshoe” Thompson, a Norwegian immigrant who used skis for 20 winters starting in 1856 as a mail carrier to transport mail between northern California and Carson Valley, Idaho. Early ski clubs similarly follow the trajectory of European settlers (notably from Norway and Sweden) to Midwestern states including Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. By 1868, steam engines opened up access for travelers into mountainous regions of the U.S. and Europe, where leisure skiing was beginning to flourish among the elite.

Folks at the Union Pacific Railroad Company in the 1930s saw the growing popularity of skiing over in Europe and the Northeast, and thought a resort-style ski area could benefit the passenger rail industry. The first chairlift for skiing, invented by a Union Pacific Railway engineer named James Curran, was installed in 1936 at a brand-new ski resort on Proctor Mountain in Sun Valley, Idaho, that was owned by the railway at the time. The plan worked: Wealthy vacationers poured into Sun Valley Resort upon its opening in December 1936. President Eisenhower’s Interstate Highway System project, launched in 1956, further eased travel across the continental U.S. and allowed more access than ever before to mountain ranges and ski resorts for recreation.

Armed with roadways, chairlifts, a healthy economy, and the invention of the metal ski in the early ‘50s, the popularity of American skiing exploded through the ‘50s and ‘60s.

Today, one of the biggest threats to the sport is climate change. A study published in Nature in November 2021 suggests a  “low- to- no snow future” for western states 35 to 60 years if greenhouse gas emissions continue at current levels.  These effects are also being felt by the American professional skiers who learned and trained on these mountains—Olympic athletes ahead of the Winter Games prepped in snow tunnels in Germany where artificial snow is guaranteed year-round.

The Yellowstone Ski Festival in West Yellowstone, Montana, was canceled last November for the first time in its 32-year history because of a lack of snow. Snow machines and other technology can’t cover some of the farthest-flung peaks, such as the Methow Trails in northern Washington, where higher and higher trails are being imagined. And with roughly 122 ski areas in the U.S. forest land, the increased rate and size of wildfires pose growing threats.

Keep reading to discover which states have the most ski resorts and the history of some of these famous locations.

(---Slide2---) #9. Maine (---2Slide---)

- Number of ski resorts: 20
- Oldest resort: Shawnee Peak Ski Area - Opened 1938
- Newest resort: Lost Valley Ski Area - Opened 1961

Numerous ski trails were cut during the Great Depression by members of the Civilian Conservation Corps , including Mt. Megunticook’s Slope Trail. At least four of the state’s mountains were etched with trails by the CCC, with some surviving to this day while most others were relocated or lost to erosion and time.

With backcountry skiing today representing the fastest-growing branch of the sport, Northeastern organizations like the Granite Backcountry Alliance are working to cut additional backcountry trails, revive segments of old CCC trails, and partner with fellow organizations and private land owners to increase overall access to backcountry skiing in a part of the country inextricably tied to backcountry skiing history.

Shawnee Peak, the Maine’s oldest ski resort, opened in 1938 in Bridgton, with trails that had been formed by the CCC and the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Originally called Pleasant Mountain for the mountain it stands upon, the resort was renamed in 1988 to Shawnee Peak to match the nameof the then–owner's other ski area in Pennsylvania.

(---Slide3---) #9. Minnesota (---3Slide---)

- Number of ski resorts: 20
- Oldest resort: Lutsen Mountains - Opened 1948
- Newest resort: Giants Ridge - Opened 1984

Skiing took hold in Minnesota earlier than in most other states due to its high volume of Scandinavian immigration between 1850 and 1930. In 1879, Norwegian immigrant Martin Strand opened Strand Ski Company, the first American ski factory, in St. Paul.

Lutsen Mountains, the state’s oldest ski resort, opened atop what later became the biggest ski area in the Midwest. The resort started as family home with rooms rented out to new settlers. Following World War II, the inn was transformed in a four-season resort with a ski lift and two runs added in 1948.

In 1932, Minnesota became the first state to make skiing an official high school sport.

Climate change is rapidly affecting Minnesota’s ski areas, as the upper Midwest U.S. is warming more rapidly than another other region in the country. The state’s winters are, on average, 7 degrees warmer than 50 years ago, which has caused havoc on slopes throughout the state. Buck Hill constructed an artificial, four-acre ski slope of malleable plastic to stretch the ski season and even offer skiing in summer months. Legislators throughout the state have also discussed “Snow Angel” grants to help ski areas adapt to the warming winters.
